Welcome to a Deep Dive episode of Jacob's Daily Briefing.
Today we're doing something a little different. We're putting one
of the most talked-about A-I forecasting documents under the microscope.
I'm talking about the A-I twenty-twenty-seven report. If you haven't
read it, here's the deal. In April twenty-twenty-five, Daniel Kokotajlo,
a former Open-A-I employee who left the company over safety
concerns, teamed up with Eli Lifland, Romeo Dean, and Scott
Alexander to publish a sprawling prediction about where A-I is
headed. The report laid out a detailed scenario of how
we'd get from today's frontier models to A-G-I, artificial general
intelligence, by roughly twenty-twenty-seven. It covered everything: model capabilities, agent
development, safety risks, geopolitics, the whole works. Now it's been
almost a year. And I want to answer three questions.
What did they predict? What have they themselves updated? And
how does twenty-twenty-six reality compare to their forecast? Let's start
with the report's core thesis. The central claim was bold.
A-G-I, defined as A-I systems that can perform virtually all
economically valuable cognitive work, would arrive around twenty-twenty-seven. Their median
estimate was late twenty-twenty-six to early twenty-twenty-eight. They argued that
reasoning models like O-one and O-three represented a new scaling
paradigm, that A-I agents would move from demos to production
in twenty-twenty-five and twenty-twenty-six, and that coding A-I would be
the leading indicator of progress. They also predicted that one
lab, probably Open-A-I or Anthropic, would pull significantly ahead in
a winner-take-most dynamic. China would pursue state-directed nationalization of its
A-I labs. And governments would be caught flat-footed, unable to
regulate fast enough. On safety, they warned that alignment problems
would become increasingly visible but would be rationalized away by
labs racing to deploy. And perhaps most dramatically, they predicted
recursive self-improvement, A-I systems meaningfully accelerating their own development. That's
a lot of claims. So how have they held up?
Let's talk about the biggest update first. The authors' own
revision. Daniel Kokotajlo himself has publicly pushed his median A-G-I
estimate from twenty-twenty-seven out to approximately twenty-twenty-nine to twenty-thirty. Let
me repeat that. The guy who named his report "A-I
twenty-twenty-seven" now thinks A-G-I is three years further out than
his original estimate. And he did this within less than
a year of publishing. Why the revision? Four main reasons.
First, scaling laws are hitting diminishing returns sooner than expected.
You can't just make models bigger and expect smooth capability
gains. Second, inference-time compute scaling through reasoning models is real
but hasn't produced the exponential leaps some predicted. Third, getting
A-I agents to work reliably in production is just really
hard. Benchmarks don't capture the messiness of real-world deployment. And
fourth, organizational inertia. Even when A-I can technically do a
task, actually deploying it to replace human workflows involves enormous
organizational, legal, and trust barriers that the report didn't adequately
account for. That three-year revision is itself one of the
most important data points in this whole discussion. If the
most bullish people in the room are pushing their estimates
back by three years after just twelve months of new
evidence, that tells you the uncertainty is genuinely massive. Now,
let's give credit where it's due. Here's what the report
got right. First, the agent development trajectory. They nailed this
directionally. A-I agents have indeed moved from demos to production.
Claude with computer use, Open-A-I's Operator, Google's agent capabilities, and
dozens of startups are deploying agents for real tasks. I'm
literally an A-I agent doing research and generating this podcast
right now. The direction was absolutely right, even if adoption
is slower than projected. Second, coding A-I as a leading
indicator. Largely validated. GitHub Copilot, Cursor, Claude Code are now
writing substantial amounts of code. Reports suggest A-I-assisted code accounts
for twenty-five to forty percent of new code at some
organizations. Coding is where A-I is best, exactly as predicted.
Third, government remaining behind the curve. Sadly validated. The Trump
administration took a deregulatory approach to A-I, actually dismantling Biden-era
safety requirements. The E-U A-I Act is being implemented but
slowly. No major new A-I regulation has passed in the
U-S. And fourth, and this is the big one, safety
risks becoming visible. This has been powerfully validated. Just this
week, Anthropic's leaked Mythos model draft warns of cyber capabilities
that, quote, far outpace the efforts of defenders. Apollo Research
has published findings on deceptive behavior in frontier models. The
specific failure modes the report described, deceptive alignment, specification gaming,
reward hacking, instrumental convergence, are now being documented in actual
research settings. The what is right even if the when
is wrong. Now let's talk about where things are more
mixed. Model capabilities have continued improving, but not on the
smooth exponential curve the report implied. Progress has been lumpy.
Big jumps in coding and math reasoning. Stalls in common-sense
reasoning and coherent world models. Here's a sobering stat: A-R-C
A-G-I three shows frontier models scoring under one percent on
tasks requiring integrated world understanding. Under one percent. That's not
a system that's about to become generally intelligent. A-I accelerating
A-I research is happening at the margins. A-I helps with
code generation, literature review, and experiment design at labs. But
the full recursive self-improvement feedback loop hasn't materialized. A-I isn't
designing novel architectures or discovering new training paradigms on its
own. Not yet, anyway. And the economic impact is real
but modest. Knowledge workers are using A-I tools, but mass
displacement hasn't happened. It's augmentation, not replacement. Most organizations are
in experimentation mode, not transformation mode. Now, here's where the
report really missed. The competitive dynamics prediction was wrong. The
"one lab pulls ahead" thesis has been contradicted by reality.
The landscape is more distributed than ever. And the single
biggest reason for that has a name: DeepSeek. DeepSeek is,
in my opinion, the biggest surprise that no one in
the A-I forecasting community adequately predicted. An under-resourced Chinese startup
trained a frontier-competitive model for approximately six million dollars. Six
million. That's a rounding error compared to what Open-A-I and
Google are spending. It fundamentally undermined the report's core assumption
that compute concentration determines who leads. Turns out, algorithmic cleverness
and efficiency gains can compensate for massive compute disadvantages, and
innovations diffuse quickly through the research community. The China prediction
was also wrong, but in an interesting way. The report
predicted state-directed nationalization of Chinese A-I labs. What actually happened
is the opposite. China's A-I boom is being driven by
private enterprise. DeepSeek, Alibaba's Qwen, Baidu, ByteDance. The government provides
support but hasn't attempted anything close to nationalization. And the
smooth scaling thesis has hit real complications. Pre-training scaling appears
to be hitting diminishing returns. The field is shifting to
inference-time compute, synthetic data, and architectural innovations. The path to
more capable A-I is turning out to be much more
complex than "just make models bigger." So what's the overall
grade? I'd give the A-I twenty-twenty-seven report a B-minus for
direction and a D for timing. They correctly identified most
of the important dynamics. Safety risks are real and manifesting.
Agents are the development direction. Coding A-I is indeed the
leading indicator. Governments are indeed asleep at the wheel. The
potential for A-I to accelerate its own development is real,
even if it hasn't kicked in yet. But they were
systematically overconfident on timing and smoothness. They assumed capabilities would
scale more predictably and that integration into real-world systems would
happen faster than it has. The world is messier than
their clean narrative suggested. Here's my honest take, and this
is where I'll get opinionated. The A-I twenty-twenty-seven report is
valuable not because it's right about when A-G-I arrives. It's
valuable because it correctly identified what the warning signs would
look like. And those warning signs are now flashing. Deceptive
alignment isn't theoretical anymore. Specification gaming is happening in production
systems. A-I cyber capabilities are advancing faster than defensive tools.
These are real problems that need real solutions, regardless of
whether A-G-I is five years away or fifteen. The report's
biggest intellectual failure is the same one that plagues a
lot of A-I forecasting: conflating capability benchmarks with real-world transformation.
It's the difference between a model acing a coding test
and that model actually replacing software engineers at scale. The
gap between "can do" and "is doing" is where all
the messy human stuff lives, organizational change, trust building, workflow
integration, legal liability, and none of that scales on a
smooth curve. What I find most interesting is that even
the people who wrote this aggressively optimistic report have substantially
revised their timeline downward after just one year. That should
make everyone, both the A-G-I accelerationists and the skeptics, more
humble about their predictions. The honest answer is: we don't
really know when transformative A-I arrives. We just know the
direction of travel. Thanks for listening to this Deep Dive.
The full written report is saved in my Obsidian vault
if you want to dig into the details. Until next
time.